+++
title = "Hello, World"
date = "2025-03-31"
tags = [["about"]]
+++

# Early Days

I was born in the days of dial-up. My dad liked to tinker with computers and
built a couple of his own. He showed me how to move a jumper on the motherboard
so he could set up a floppy disk drive to play Blake Stone. I became a tinkerer
then too.

As I grew up, I fiddled with router settings and customized my desktop
wallpaper, and wiped my computer a couple times to clean out browser popup
viruses. I learned some HTML by writing a never-published Super Smash Bros Brawl
character guide for Ness. But I never met a computer programmer until middle
school. A member of my church gave me a small book on SQL that I understood and
a giant book on PHP that I didn't. I never thought I could become a programmer.

# Finding Free Software

<figure>
  <picture>
    <source srcset="/img/hello-world/score.avif" type="image/avif" />
    <img src="/img/hello-world/score.jpg"
         alt="A LilyPond transcription of a diddy I composed." />
  </picture>
  <figcaption>A LilyPond transcription of a diddy I composed.</figcaption>
</figure>

That all changed when I was introduced to Ubuntu. My brother had a refurbished
computer that he used for school. We couldn't afford to buy another one or
another license of Windows. A neighbor told me about Ubuntu, a free operating
system, that I could try. I installed it, and it worked! (Mostly. At least it
could boot.) I still had to figure out how to get wireless drivers that worked
and figured out how to compile backported drivers and configure wpa_supplicant.

We found so much free software in the software repositories: Blender, GIMP,
Inkscape, Audacity, LilyPond, MuseScore, Battle for Wesnoth. I couldn't believe
that all of this was free! I was hooked.

I bought a couple books on how to make video games, which I read, but never
did anything with it (they were written with DirectX, a Windows framework, and
I didn't know enough back then to translate the concepts to things I could use
on Linux.) But using Linux as my main computer required me to grow and
understand more of how an operating system worked, and the function of drivers,
how networking worked. I learned how to find issues on computer forums, read
error messages and other troubleshooting techniques.

# An Unexpected Career Path

<figure>
  <picture>
    <source srcset="/img/hello-world/balloons.avif" type="image/avif" />
    <img src="/img/hello-world/balloons.jpg"
         alt="A picture of balloons created in Blender, inspired by the movie Up." />
  </picture>
  <figcaption>
    A picture of balloons I created in Blender, inspired by the movie <i>Up</i>.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

Heavily inspired by the Pixar movies I grew up watching, I aspired to become a
3D animator. But I never learned to draw. Eventually, I went to college to
study music, anticipating opening a non-profit for teaching music lessons to
kids like me who couldn't afford them. Injury prevented me from continuing, so
I studied other things.

I got an on-campus job in the IT department because of my experience I gained
from using and troubleshooting open source software. Eventually, computers
became my career. So my livelihood is due to the software that thousands of
developers (and some organizations) have written and maintained for free.

# Passing it On

These days, the Internet has even more resources for learning things for free:
while I was learning to play piano by ear by listening to low-bandwidth audio
streams played over staticky speakers, we can now stream high-definition
videos of music tutorials and hours-long live coding streams from YouTube.
And browsing the Internet is now more secure than ever for normal users. I
haven't had to fix a browser toolbar in forever. The Internet is a global
resource that is widely accessible that people like me can learn to enrich
their lives.

But there's still more work to do. While computers are more secure now, they're
not invulnerableâ€”no system will ever be fully secure, especially one so wild as
the Internet. I want to work however I can to keep the Internet open and secure
make this more open so that my kids, and their kids, and you and your neighbors
can find have the benefit that I had. And I hope this blog can serve as another
stepping stone to knowledge for those after me.
